When determining which settings and patients should be prioritized for use of contact precautions, the
efficiency and effectiveness of this approach must be considered. Economic evaluations, such as those
proposed here, can help determine the optimal strategy when taking into account the resources used and the
outcomes to be achieved among a list of various targeted contact precautions strategies.
We will develop a dynamic transmission model to compare the cost-effectiveness of different contact
precaution strategies. For pragmatic considerations, the analysis will compare the costs and effectiveness of
four different contact precaution strategies across diverse hospital settings: 1) having no MRSA patients on
contact precautions; 2) having all MRSA patients on contact precautions; 3) having all MRSA patients in the
ICU only on contact precautions; 3) having certain healthcare professionals (respiratory therapists, physical
therapists, occupational therapists, nurses, physicians) use contact precautions and other professions not; in
both ICU and non-ICU settings and 4) having admitted MRSA patients with certain risk factors on contact
precautions.46
For each strategy, costs will include both direct medical and indirect (i.e., productivity losses) costs.
Effectiveness measures will include MRSA colonizations and infections averted, infection-related deaths
averted, and life-years. An additional effectiveness measure will be PPE saved that could then be used for
other purposes, which is an especially relevant metric in the current COVID-19 pandemic when PPE is scarce
and has so many other important uses. After eliminating dominated strategies, we will identify the optimal
strategy by constructing incremental cost-effectiveness ratios by dividing the incremental cost by the
incremental effectiveness between two strategies. We will analyze this model from the VA perspective using
VA-specific cost inputs whenever possible including those from our previous studies which estimated the
attributable mortality and both pre-49 and post-discharge50 attributable costs from MRSA HAIs in VA facilities.
D12. Transmission model
Figure 4 represents a graphical presentation of our dynamic transmission model. At baseline, patients enter
the simulation model based on their ICU- vs. non-ICU admission location status. According to the initial
prevalence of MRSA colonization and MRSA infection in ICU or non-ICU settings, we will model the natural
history of MRSA for patients during the hospital stay and post discharge. We will assume that non-colonized
patients have a risk of acquiring MRSA colonization based on where they were originally admitted to and the
colonization prevalence of MRSA colonization in the corresponding setting (the higher the prevalence of MRSA
colonization, the higher the risk of acquiring MRSA colonization amongst non-colonized patients). An MRSA
colonized patient may face four possibilities: 1) progressing to MRSA infection; 2) remaining asymptomatically
Contact PD/PI: HARRIS, ANTHONY
VA Research Plan Page 29
colonized; 3) transitioning to not colonized or infected state; and 4) dying. In addition, an MRSA infected
patient will stay in the same health state until the treatment is complete or he/she dies.
We will model five types of MRSA infection; “catheter-associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI)”, “central lineassociated
bloodstream infection (CLABSI)”, “ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP)”,” skin and soft tissue
infection (SSTI)”, and “surgical site infection (SSI)”. Also, patients discharged from hospital who are still MRSA
colonized have a chance of developing an infection which can be treated in an outpatient setting or can lead to
another subsequent hospitalization. We will use a similar model structure with different sets of probabilities and
rates for non-ICU admitted patients.
Model parameters: We will inform our core model parameters including transition probabilities and rates,
direct medical costs, indirect costs, baseline MRSA colonization and infection prevalence rates for ICU and
non-ICU settings, and incidence of MRSA colonization and infection rates for ICU and non-ICU settings from
the published literature.81–84 Data from previously published studies coupled with data from aims 1 and 2 of this
proposal will inform effectiveness of precaution policies in ICU and non-ICU settings. In the event that we find
multiple studies reporting on a model parameter, we will conduct an appropriate meta-analysis method to
inform the pooled estimates.85 To inform the second- and first-order uncertainty, we will assign probabilistic
distributions to the model parameters of our model in accordance with the International Society for
Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research (ISPOR)-Society for Medical Decision Making (SMDM)
Modeling Good Research Practices Task Force.86
Figure 4. Graphical representation of the dynamic transmission model.
ICU: intensive care unit; MRSA: methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; CAUTI: catheter-associated urinary tract
infection; CLABSI: central line-associated bloodstream infection; VAP: ventilator-associated pneumonia; SSI: surgical
site infections; SSTI: skin and soft tissue infection
Analysis: Our model will consist of two elements; an underlying transmission model which will be used to
simulate the underlying patient health states, and then an economic model which will incorporate the cost
components associated with the underlying patient events and histories. We will simulate patient flow, and
MRSA transmission and infection in a 100-bed hospital having 15 ICU beds for one year, following patient
movement after discharge during that period, allowing for hospital readmissions. Model parameters
incorporated in the transmission component of the model will be treated as fixed, estimated as the mean of the
Contact PD/PI: HARRIS, ANTHONY
VA Research Plan Page 30
underlying parameter distribution. For each run of the transmission model, key events and patient outcomes
will be tracked recorded to and output for the cost analysis evaluation, as we have done previously.48 The
economic analysis will then be implemented as a Monte Carlo based simulation that accounts for second-order
variation in the uncertainty of the economic parameter inputs. This analysis will be repeated across a range of
transmission model parameters based on our estimated distributions, representing a sensitivity analysis for our
model outputs and evaluating the robustness of our results. Given the choice of one-year time horizon in the
base case analysis, we will not discount future health and economic values. Nevertheless, we will run separate
scenario analysis to run the model for 2 and 5 years, in which case, we will discount the future health and
economic values by using a 3% discount rate as recommended by the guidelines.87 We will build our dynamic
transmission model in R version 3.5.1.